notebooks/sophy.md, before:

# SOPHY Notes

### Spring Quarter 2022 Wrap-Up

### Iterating over a Dataframe
- ADD here: incorrectly used for loop rather than vectorization and DF built in indexing

### Natural Key vs AphiaID
- Datasets that contain microscopy data will most likely contain a 'scientific_name' field that we will also have a corresponding AphiaID we will get from the WoRMS database
- sci_name is a key for aphia_id and vice versa so we should only store one of them in the main table
- However not all microscopy data goes to the level of sci_name and may only go down to genus
- In that case the aphia_id approach is correct since we can keep the aphia_id for the genus and then have access to it's full taxa through the microscopy table whereas that would not be possible with only a sci_name col in the main table
- This approach also correctly handles the issue of when two names are different in Python or just visually, but actually represent the same species in which case we should map that row to a certain aphia_id that correctly identifies them as the same
```python
pyworms.aphiaRecordsByMatchNames('Coccopterum labyrinthus') # accepted name
pyworms.aphiaRecordsByMatchNames('Coccopterum_labyrinthus') # slightly different formatting
pyworms.aphiaRecordsByMatchNames('Pterosperma labyrinthus') # unaccepted name, but same species
```
- A rank column may also be useful however it seems like data that can be inferred from what data is present and not present, so TBD

### Defining geospatial regions in the Southern Ocean
- We want to be able to label rows with a certain regions like the one seen in the map:
  <img alt="Southern Ocean Map" src="southern_ocean.jpg" title="Southern Ocean Map" width="300"/>
- Cannot use simple lat long filters since they are rectangular unlike our regions
- Solutions inlcude ArcGIS filter/map or polygons that have predefined these regions
- Main point is that there must be a mapping from latitude to region
- If one is not available, we can explore how to create that mapping
- Mapping can and should be done at insert time, not runtime to speed up queries that use this data
- Some options are GeoPandas, [GeoJSON](https://handsondataviz.org/geojsonio.html), ArcGIS, PostGIS, pyshp, PyGIS, and arcpy
- An issue with the Arc family is that they are not open-source unlike GeoJSON and others

### Workflow of Python and SQLite
- Both have a way of storing large amounts of 2D data(dataframes vs. tables) so it can be confusing when to use which
- Dataframes are much easier to modify, can be used alongside python code, and keeps history of operation
- SQLite is much faster at writing queries and join style operations
- Data loading, cleanup, and write to database will be done in Python with dataframes 
- Then queries only with SQLite

### Re-normalization of columns: major fix
- Updated schema to avoid normalizing much more than needed (3 FK's in schema)
- I used to create a whole new cruise table since I thought repeating a string in the same column was repeated data that needed to be fixed
- **Normalization means when one column can allow you to infer other columns**
  - For example when knowing the source name (LTER) can tell you author, doi, url, etc. and that data doesn't need to be repeated across many columns
  - One **key** gives you access to the other columns
  - Then that data goes in a new table and the main table simply references that one key to have access to the rest of the data
  - It's ok to repeat values within a column, but there shouldn’t be columns that infer other columns within a table
- This change has drastically reduced the number of tables in the DB (see schema v5 &rarr; v6)

### Primary Key Setup
- They can be auto-generated in SQLite, but is that the best way?
```sql
id int primary key autoincrement
```
- Some alternatives are GUID, UUID, and natural keys
- The key does not need to be unique across the database so GUID is probably overkill
- Autoincrement is the best option for now since it also the default option in SQLite

### Tech Stack
- Dataset(CSV) &rarr; DataFrame(Python) &rarr; sophy(SQLite)
- Sophy can be created in sqlite (createTables.sql) then saved as an .db file to insert data with Python
- First test is to load the LTER dataset through the tech stack

### Column that can hold id of two possible tables
- The problem is called Polymorphic Associations
- I would like to reference two tables to the same column with an FK
  - For example microscopy id OR taxa id
- One fix is to make a supertable that generates a primary key, then the two 'sub' tables reference their id from the super table
- This is essentially a PFK (primary foreign key) since each row in the sub tables is unique but technically still a foreign key
- The only issue is that it complicates the schema and doing queries since there is an extra table needed to do inserts

### Phytoplankton microscopy vs. pigment based taxa classification
- I originally thought  each (in situ) dataset would provide a species name that could be converted into a taxonomy tree (using microscopy)
- In reality they provide either microscopy OR pigment data. Both provide a classification of the taxonomy of each sample
- Pigments are the chemical method by using pigment markers and the CHEMTAX software to determine the species composition of a water sample. CHEMTAX gives the percentage of ~5 groups to determine species comp.
- The schema needs to be restructured to reflect this change. One row in one dataset represents a full water sample(pigments) but one row in another dataset represents the amount of each species found (microscopy). Since they are inherently different row structures, a new table may be needed.

### Tags
- We need to be able to classify rows with certain data like the method of sampling, quality of data, etc
- Tags are a great way to do this since we can create a tag, then reuse that same tag for several rows
- Represented by a many &rarr; many relationship in SQL.

### WoRMS Database
- We will be using [WoRMS](https://www.marinespecies.org/) since it is the most relevant and established database for our research
- All taxonomy data will be sourced from there
- There is Python package that allows us to query the DB and get the full taxa of a species
```python
import pyworms
pyworms.aphiaRecordsByMatchNames('Carteria marina')
```

### Database Planning ###
- Who are the users?
  - Researchers (oceanography most likely)
  - They have experience with Python and Jupyter notebooks
  - Should make a document on how to use the program
- RDMS vs. Excel/CSV
  - CSV will get slow in the range of millions of columns to even just search
  - Major benefits will be seen when making the niche model
    - Researchers may not have super complex queries but the niche model will
    - The model will be **significantly** faster at runtime (visualization)
  - Data is also much easier to add since structure is clearly defined

Commit message:

Wrapping up spring quarter entry

notebooks/sophy.md, after:

# SOPHY Notes

### Spring Quarter 2022 Wrap-Up
- Feature List:
  - Main script can add two full datasets to database (~1.3 mil rows)
    - _LTER_ and _Phytobase_ were chosen since they cover the two different formats of taxonomy data (microscopy and CHEMTAX)
    - Also adds foreign keys from microscopy table (Phytobase)
  - Query WoRMS database for taxa records
    - Converts result from pyworms package into formatted dataframe
  - **Modular code** that easily translates to other datasets
    - Code from this quarter is quite short since I have reviewed each operation several times to prioritize simplicity and performance as a setup for the summer
    - The formula is made for how to add new datasets; data read, modify, write, and fk setup
- Next steps:
  - Support for location, source, and tag tables as part of data insert
  - Work on test suite even though code format may change (new classes/functions)
  - Build collection of datasets we want to add to SOPHY
    - Can be done concurrently with writing new code
    - The schema and code will adapt to deal with new challenges or design changes
  - How to interact with the database?
    - Research how scientific databases are usually presented (GUI, Jupyter, etc.)
    - We can make pre-built use cases for common operations

### Iterating over a Dataframe
- I was finding methods to iterate over a dataframe such as itterows(), but operations seemed to be taking longer than expected (~2s)
- Across several functions, I was incorrectly iterating over a dataframe rather than **vectorization** and using pandas built in indexing
- **Vectorization** means using pre-defined, highly optimized methods to process data
- The time complexity and runtime is orders of magnitude lower when using vectorization since DataFrame's are meant to use it

### Natural Key vs AphiaID
- Datasets that contain microscopy data will most likely contain a 'scientific_name' field that we will also have a corresponding AphiaID we will get from the WoRMS database
- sci_name is a key for aphia_id and vice versa so we should only store one of them in the main table
- However not all microscopy data goes to the level of sci_name and may only go down to genus
- In that case the aphia_id approach is correct since we can keep the aphia_id for the genus and then have access to it's full taxa through the microscopy table whereas that would not be possible with only a sci_name col in the main table
- This approach also correctly handles the issue of when two names are different in Python or just visually, but actually represent the same species (WoRMS flags species name as unaccepted)
```python
pyworms.aphiaRecordsByMatchNames('Coccopterum labyrinthus')  # accepted name
pyworms.aphiaRecordsByMatchNames('Coccopterum_labyrinthus')  # slightly different formatting
pyworms.aphiaRecordsByMatchNames('Pterosperma labyrinthus')  # unaccepted name, but same species
```
- A rank column may also be useful however it seems like data that can be inferred from what data is present and not present, so TBD

### Defining geospatial regions in the Southern Ocean
- We want to be able to label rows with a certain regions like the one seen in the map:
  <img alt="Southern Ocean Map" src="southern_ocean.jpg" title="Southern Ocean Map" width="300"/>
- Cannot use simple lat long filters since they are rectangular unlike our regions
- Solutions inlcude ArcGIS filter/map or polygons that have predefined these regions
- Main point is that there must be a mapping from latitude to region
- If one is not available, we can explore how to create that mapping
- Mapping can and should be done at insert time, not runtime to speed up queries that use this data
- Some options are GeoPandas, [GeoJSON](https://handsondataviz.org/geojsonio.html), ArcGIS, PostGIS, pyshp, PyGIS, and arcpy
- An issue with the Arc family is that they are not open-source unlike GeoJSON and others

### Workflow of Python and SQLite
- Both have a way of storing large amounts of 2D data(dataframes vs. tables) so it can be confusing when to use which
- Dataframes are much easier to modify, can be used alongside python code, and keeps history of operation
- SQLite is [much faster](https://www.thedataincubator.com/blog/2018/05/23/sqlite-vs-pandas-performance-benchmarks/) at select style operations
- Data loading, cleanup, and write to database will be done in Python with dataframes 
- Then queries only with SQLite

### Re-normalization of columns: major fix
- Updated schema to avoid normalizing much more than needed (3 FK's in schema)
- I used to create a whole new cruise table since I thought repeating a string in the same column was repeated data that needed to be fixed
- **Normalization means when one column can allow you to infer other columns**
  - For example when knowing the source name (LTER) can tell you author, doi, url, etc. and that data doesn't need to be repeated across many columns
  - One **key** gives you access to the other columns
  - Then that data goes in a new table and the main table simply references that one key to have access to the rest of the data
  - It's ok to repeat values within a column, but there shouldn’t be columns that infer other columns within a table
- This change has drastically reduced the number of tables in the DB (see schema v5 &rarr; v6)

### Primary Key Setup
- They can be auto-generated in SQLite, but is that the best way?
```sql
id int primary key autoincrement
```
- Some alternatives are GUID, UUID, and natural keys
- The key does not need to be unique across the database so GUID is probably overkill
- Autoincrement is the best option for now since it also the default option in SQLite

### Tech Stack
- Dataset(CSV) &rarr; DataFrame(Python) &rarr; sophy(SQLite)
- Sophy can be created in sqlite (createTables.sql) then saved as an .db file to insert data with Python
- First test is to load the LTER dataset through the tech stack

### Column that can hold id of two possible tables
- The problem is called Polymorphic Associations
- I would like to reference two tables to the same column with an FK
  - For example microscopy id OR taxa id
- One fix is to make a supertable that generates a primary key, then the two 'sub' tables reference their id from the super table
- This is essentially a PFK (primary foreign key) since each row in the sub tables is unique but technically still a foreign key
- The only issue is that it complicates the schema and doing queries since there is an extra table needed to do inserts

### Phytoplankton microscopy vs. pigment based taxa classification
- I originally thought  each (in situ) dataset would provide a species name that could be converted into a taxonomy tree (using microscopy)
- In reality they provide either microscopy OR pigment data. Both provide a classification of the taxonomy of each sample
- Pigments are the chemical method by using pigment markers and the CHEMTAX software to determine the species composition of a water sample. CHEMTAX gives the percentage of ~5 groups to determine species comp.
- The schema needs to be restructured to reflect this change. One row in one dataset represents a full water sample(pigments) but one row in another dataset represents the amount of each species found (microscopy). Since they are inherently different row structures, a new table may be needed.

### Tags
- We need to be able to classify rows with certain data like the method of sampling, quality of data, etc
- Tags are a great way to do this since we can create a tag, then reuse that same tag for several rows
- Represented by a many &rarr; many relationship in SQL.

### WoRMS Database
- We will be using [WoRMS](https://www.marinespecies.org/) since it is the most relevant and established database for our research
- All taxonomy data will be sourced from there
- There is Python package that allows us to query the DB and get the full taxa of a species
```python
import pyworms
pyworms.aphiaRecordsByMatchNames('Carteria marina')
```

### Database Planning ###
- Who are the users?
  - Researchers (oceanography most likely)
  - They have experience with Python and Jupyter notebooks
  - Should make a document on how to use the program
- RDMS vs. Excel/CSV
  - CSV will get slow in the range of millions of columns to even just search
  - Major benefits will be seen when making the niche model
    - Researchers may not have super complex queries but the niche model will
    - The model will be **significantly** faster at runtime (visualization)
  - Data is also much easier to add since structure is clearly defined
